n26631 - add notes and questions (#600)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2022-12-14-#26631.md

commit: 
---

## Notes

### concepts

- Each bitcoin transaction output carries a specific
  [value](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6061eb6564105ad54703a7cf3282590d0e1a7f28/src/primitives/transaction.h#L159).
  Bitcoin Core defines _dust_ as an output whose value is less than
  what it would cost to spend this output.

- An important goal of the Bitcoin network is to keep the resource costs
  for running a fully-validating node to a minimum. One way to reduce
  the storage requirement is to keep the size of the UTXO set small.

- If it were possible for an attacker, or a careless user, to create
  many tiny-value UTXOs, the UTXO set could be increased dramatically,

>   because whoever is able to spend these UTXOs (and thus remove them

Reviewer: I would call it a problem with the wallet rather than the user. It's also still 100% possible
```suggestion
- It would be inexpensive for an attacker, or a careless wallet, to create
  many tiny-value UTXOs, bloating the UTXO set. Additionally,
  whoever is able to spend these UTXOs (and thus remove them
```

  from the UTXO set) would have little to no incentive to do so.

- For this reason, Bitcoin Core has a policy of not accepting into its

>   mempool or relaying any transaction with a _dust_ output, that is, an

Reviewer: **spendable**, dust is allowed in nulldata
```suggestion
  mempool or relaying any transaction with a spendable _dust_ output, that is, an
```

  output whose value is below the _dust_ limit.

### details

- When validating an incoming transaction, policy code calculates the
  fee, at a particular feerate, to "pay for" both the output and the (later)
  spending input. This fee is proportional to the sum of the sizes,
  measured in virtual bytes, of both the input and output.

- If the output value is below this (hypothetical)
  fee, it is considered
  [_dust_](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/1ea02791f3d81c7716d9ea455971203f74d7a107/src/policy/policy.cpp#L65);
  it would cost more to spend this output than its value.

- An output's virtual size is just it's physical size, but an input typically
  also includes _witness data_ which is discounted: 4 bytes of witness data
  is counted as one byte of virtual data.

- Rather than the dust feerate being hardcoded, `bitcoind` includes a
  configuration option `-dustrelayfee=<feerate>` to set this value.

- This feerate is in units of BTC per kvB (1000 virtual bytes).
  The default is 0.00003 BTC per kvB (3000 sats/kvB or 3 sat/vB).

- More information can be found on
  [stackexchange](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/10986/what-is-meant-by-bitcoin-dust).

> - There are several kinds of outputs (for example, P2PK, P2PKH), and each has

Reviewer: There are infinite outputs; we enumerate the *standard* ones. We cannot predict the size of a P2SH input without knowing the script.
```suggestion
- There are several kinds of standard outputs (for example, P2PK, P2PKH), and some have
```

  a characteristic size, both of the output itself and for the input that will
  later spend it. Enforcing the dust limit requires the code to

>   [calculate](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/1ea02791f3d81c7716d9ea455971203f74d7a107/src/policy/policy.cpp#L26)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [estimate](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/1ea02791f3d81c7716d9ea455971203f74d7a107/src/policy/policy.cpp#L26)
```

   to all of a transaction's outputs collectively?
   Can you think of an anomolous case in which this policy conflicts with
   being miner-incentive compatatible?

1. Why is this feerate a configuration option, which makes it fairly static
   (most node operators probably just accept the default), rather than having
   it dynamically track the prevailing network feerate?

1. Why is `-dustrelayfee` a _hidden_ (or _debug_) option?

1. Since `-dustrelayfee` is a per-node configuration option, what happens if various
   nodes on the network set different values?

1. Can you see a future scenario where we'd want to change the default value of `-dustrelayfee`?
   Would it more likely be increased or decreased? What does this depend on and which other
   configuration options would then also very likely be adapted?

1. What does the largest possible output script that adheres to standardness rules look like?
   Is it currently implemented in the functional test?

1. Which of the output scripts need to be inferred from an actual public key (derived from ECKey
   in the test)? Could some of them also be created with only random data?

>    (Idea: learn which output script types are checked for full EC-validity.
>    Particulary interesting here is the difference between P2PK and P2TR.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I just verified and unfortunately had this wrong, neither the P2PK nor the P2TR output types need the contained pubkeys to be fully valid (i.e. on the curve) to be treated as standard. Which in turn means that literally all output scripts could be created with random (hashes or pubkey coordinates) data, and we wouldn't even need to involve the ECKey class. Could keep the part before though as trick questions if you want? (The answer would be: none of them, all of them.)

commit: 
---

## Notes

> - The `bitcoind` configuration option `-dustrelayfee=<amount>` determines

Author: I was thinking the Notes states a bunch of facts, i.e. background material, and the _why_ would be better as a question, which I have as the third question below, "Why is the concept of _dust_ useful? What problems might occur if it didn't exist?"

Would you say that's not the correct way to organize the Notes (and questions)?

But now that @theStack has provided many great questions, I think I can reorganize this as you suggest -- give the motivation here.

  a minimum value on any of a transaction's outputs for the transaction to be
  accepted into the mempool and relayed to peers.

- The `amount` parameter does not directly set the minimum output value;
  rather, it is a _feerate_ in units of BTC per kvB (1000 virtual bytes).
  The default is 0.00003 BTC (3000 sats).

- When validating an incoming transaction, policy code calculates the
  fee that would be needed, at the given feerate, to both create the output
  and the (later) input. If the output value is below this (hypothetical)
  fee, it is considered
  [_dust_](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/1ea02791f3d81c7716d9ea455971203f74d7a107/src/policy/policy.cpp#L65);
  it would cost more to spend this output than its value.

- If a transaction has one or more dust outputs,
  it is considered nonstandard, and will not be accepted nor relayed.

> - This differs from `-minrelaytxfee=<amount>`, which sets the lower bound on the

Author: Thanks, this ("this", haha) is definitely a mistake, it's what happens when you insert a new bullet point between two existing ones and forget to update them accordingly! Will fix, thanks.

Actually, maybe I'll remove all references to `-minrelayfee`, it was just something that I had to mentally process, to make the clear distinction in my own mind, but that might just be me. Maybe it's obvious to everyone else.
